---
layout: post
title: "Nineteen Eighty-Four is Important, But..."
permalink: /writing/nineteen-eighty-four-is-important-but/
---
In 1949, George Orwell published his perhaps most culturally significant and popular book, Nineteen Eighty-Four. In it, Britain, dubbed "Air-Strip One", is the home of an all-reaching all-encompassing totalitarian state---a state oppressive enough to make even Joseph Stalin blush. In Nineteen Eighty-Four, Chocolate rations are raised to twenty grammes from thirty, Big Brother watches your movement at every moment, and every single person is an informant. In a word, reality is denied. 

Patronising the reader by explaining the themes of Nineteen Eighty-Four is not only well-well-trodden ground but also unnecessary. I am not only a card-carrying member of the human race but also a passport-holding resident of Air-Strip One and Northern Ireland and I can see the themes Orwell paints in today's society in Britain and in the current global order. In Britain, the Labour government seem to be taking a page out of the CCPs book by enforcing not only effectively a [digital signature](https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/uk-to-require-id-or-face-scan-before-you-can-make-social-media-accounts/) on every online interaction but also the limiting on the personal liberties by ensuring, by means of digital scanning, that you are old enough to use the internet. Fantastic in practice, and it is really quite difficult rhetorically to run on a platform of "I'm against [this means of] protecting children against online harm", but where and to whom does my 3d modelled face go? Who is accountable in this chain of identity highway robbery? I digress but you see the repeated-ad-nauseum similarities between Keir Stalin and Lord bLiars privacy policy and the Telescreen.

Since I can't help myself, and to not leave a clause hanging, let us consider A-S1's Ministries: Ministry of Truth, a.k.a. the propaganda department; Ministry of Peace, a.k.a. the War department; Ministry of Plenty, a.k.a. the rationing department; and the Ministry of Love, the torture department. We find here the theme of doublethink: the capacity to hold two contrasting views at once and not need to reconcile them. Ministry of Peace, hmm, that is an awfully familiar title in 2026. Where have I heard that? Ah! The esteemed Board of Peace! Tabled by such pillars of liberal global order as [criminal convict](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c2qqnxnwl7wo) Donald Trump (who is also the eternal dear leader of the operation), the aforementioned war criminal and all-round sweetheart Tony Blair, and the [ICC and Hague-bound](https://www.icc-cpi.int/defendant/netanyahu) Netenyahu---all of whom are bored of peace. All we need is for Pete [Deus Volt"](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/mar/27/pete-hegseth-tattoo-arabic-language) Hegseth to rename his Ministry of War to something equally brazenly dystopian.

Orwell was a dyed-in-the-wool socialist. Born into British rule in Burma with a pith helmet on his head, he played the role of colonialist---a representation of the British Empire in flesh and blood. He was an actor in the oppression of the local Myanmar peoples---something which came to form a deep resentment for the physical and moral decadence of the British Raj. After five years in the Indo-Pacific he travelled back to dear old Blighty, working for a living and then writing essays, including ones about his experience in Burma. His Burmese experience left him with a profound sense of the need for social equality and democracy. So deeply convicted was his belief in the socialist project that he went to Spain to fight against the [Francoist dictatorship](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francoist_Spain). He returned home severely wounded, and drawing from his experience as a member of the Raj colonialist apparatus and from his witnessing of dictatorship in Spain, continued writing essays and prose. His experiences heavily influenced his two most popular novels: Animal Farm and Nineteen Eighty-Four.

Nineteen Eighty-Four is also, however, informed by the governance and politics that Orwell did not witness first-hand. A large part of Nineteen Eighty-Four's world is allegory of Joseph Stalin's USSR: [Informants](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NKVD) at every level of bureaucracy; the ["memory holing"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Purge) of unwanted persons; the [idolatry of leaders](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Stalin%27s_cult_of_personality), the lack of autonomy presented to women, etc. Such is the case of Emmanuel Goldstein, AS-1's chief enemy-of-the-people. Goldstein, the subject of a daily two-minute hate session, is directly based on [Leon Trotsky](/writing/trotsky-rhetoric/), a Soviet Revolutionary and the heir-apparent of V.I. Lenin. A person who was so close to and trusted by Lenin, in-fact, that Lenin would give him blank signed pieces of paper to write orders to the Red Army. In Lenin's ill health, Stalin used the Soviet bureaucracy to gain sovereignty of the state, ousting and eventually exiling Trotsky in the process. Such is the case in Nineteen Eighty-Four: Goldstein, a member of The Party, a close colleague of Big Brother, ousted from The Party and forming an opposition, eventually exiled from the nation, whose intellectual works are memory-holed leaving only a hollow silhouette to be filled by hatred from the masses. Emmanuel Goldstein's noted work: *Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism*, heavily mirroring Trotsky's definitive work regarding Stalin's bureaucratic parasitic capture of the Soviet system: [*The Revolution Betrayed*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1936/revbet/). Just as in Air-Strip One Oceania's foreign policy changes week to week, so is the transient and shifting internal nature of Soviet Policy in the mid 20th Century. Stalin, in his 30 year Napoleonic reign over USSR, would capitalise on not having written policy position, something akin to a [sofa-government](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/may/16/comment.labour), in order to control narratives and secure lasting power. 

Such is the state of Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four---it does not matter if policy has changed. Hypocrisy or U-turns do not exist. "We have always been at war with East-Asia". The coworker with whom you were talking to yesterday never existed. Even if policy or chocolate rationing did change, though, the point is the same. The point is accepting two opposing and contradicting positions at once, and being so spiritually broken as to not have any problems with it. Oceania may not be at war with East-Asia and allied with Eurasia; there may be no war at all. All that is important is the serene acceptance of the circumstance in front of you.

I've read Nineteen Eighty-Four thrice now, once on paperback (at a very reasonable price), once as an audiobook, and once as an abridged theatrical audio only experience which had equal amounts of sensual moaning as tortured screaming. I enjoyed it; I found it satisfiably unsettling and appreciated the foresight Orwell displayed and how accurate some of his predictions turned out to be. I have, however, an issue with how Nineteen Eighty-Four is presented as this gospel-like revelation of life in the future. In a sense, the books quality both in prose and foresight is its own demerit. Nineteen Eighty-Four is used as shorthand for "the thing I don't like". It seems to me, that people, especially [FOX News](https://youtu.be/yYXwZDODkAI?is=kznvOA1VlVlEC2yj
) and GB News presenters, have only read one book. Everything is Orwellian, everything is Big Brother. Doubleplus annoying...

Yes, the metaphor gets dry... and trite... and loses meaning. But what annoys me most is FOX-News-Presenter types reading Nineteen Eighty-Four and not applying it equally to their worldview, missing the wood for the trees, as it were. Yes, (and I'm talking here as a British person looking with a very large telescope towards North America) FNP types have a point with "the left's" reasonably successful attempts to remove words or ideas from the mainstream. Casualties of a culture-war are being memory-holed by liberals. I bemoan these "cancellations" of persons and of words. Ideas, no matter how horrific, like fungi breed in darkness under crevices and die a quick death after being exposed to light. There should be space to discuss ideas (to an extent) lest these ideas move underground, festering and becoming extreme. Orwell detests totality and suppression whether on a state scale or a socio-ideological scale. They're right to point allude to Big Brother when it comes to issues of personal liberty, privacy and surveillance. They're right to have a weariness of the positioning of conventional media corporations and to not take all information at face value.

But FNP types can't see the other side of the coin: they also use the tactics that Orwell warns us about! Co-ordinated witch-hunts, mis- and disinformation, and echo chambers are the workhorse tools of FNP types. The other week, I sat and watched FOX news for about two hours with a friend while playing a puzzle game, just to see the baffling and almost absurd political and prescription drug ads allowed on North American television. My brain was throbbing after it. You would think that California had descended oblivion, like some scene from Mad Max. Reporting on British political events were being bastardised to such a degree that I had to turn it off and cool down, missing out on the ridiculous adverts. Social media is another kettle of fish completely, and I'm not even going to consider the damage it does to the psyche of a online politically engaged person. 

If Orwell saw the characters using his works in such a manner, he would be doing 180RPM in his grave. Orwell, a Socialist Democrat, believed in liberty for all, freedom of information, of thought and discussion, for a liberal state, free of oppression, providing public goods. He would detest "socialism" being used as pejorative .He was opposed to hate campaigns, preferring debate. He detested state corruption and parasitic bureaucratism. On an unrelated note, leader of the free world Donald Trump has, through his office, personally gained $1,600,000,000 to his own net worth. I wonder if FNPs would call that Orwellian. Perhaps if they had read the book.


I also wonder why it is always Nineteen Eighty-Four.  Sure, it has a long-lasting quality and pertinence. Might, however, we have a more nuanced if not worldview at-least word-choice when talking about current or future politics if we used metaphor from novels other than Nineteen Eighty-Four. I wonder what FNP types would have to say about the anti-intellectual (i.e. anti "fake news") movements in Farenheit 451 or Two-Body Problem, or the destruction of women's autonomy via they're reproductive rights in the Handmaid's tale.