---
layout: post
title: "Trotsky on the Balkans, Stalin, and Ukraine"
permalink: /writing/trotsky-rhetoric/
---

> “There was an old bastard named Lenin 
>
>Who did two or three million men in.
>
>That's a lot to have done in
>
>But where he did one in
>
> That old bastard Stalin did ten in.” 

# Trotsky, The Balkans, Stalin, and Ukraine


Leon Trotsky (Лев Троцкий; 1879 - 1940) was a Russian revolutionary, historian, and intellectual. A key figure in the [Russian Revolution of 1905](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russian_Revolution_of_1905) as well as the [October Revolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/October_Revolution) twelve years later, he lead the Red army from 1918 until being marginalised and ousted from government after Lenin's death, at which time Stalin, through a series of political maneuvres, suceeded to the position of premier of the USSR. Trotsky, after being ousted from government by Stalin, spent a few years in Russia in opposition, and was subsequently exiled from his country, spending a decade in Europe and the Americas. Trotsky would meet his fate at the hands of a Stalinist [NKVD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NKVD) agent, who in August 1940, assassinated the exile in his Mexico City home.

Trotsky would advance the theories of Marxism-Leninism, forming a sect of socialist thought known as [Trotskyism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trotskyism). Trotsky was critical of [Stalinism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stalinism), and argued, among other things, that the USSR was a "degenerated workers state". I say this not as trivia but to set Trotsky's colours to the mast, and so I can illustrate what I enjoy so much about Trotsky's beliefs and writing style.

While we are setting out stalls, let me declare: I am not a communist. Firstly, I don't believe in labelling myself politically. Secondly, I don't consider myself well-read enough to consider myself a Marxist, Trotskyite, Maoist, Thatcherite--any of it. However, I admire the dedication, the Hegelian idealism, the sense social justice these revolutionaries had, and the will they exhibited by putting their ideas into action--for good or for bad. You may call this an idolisation of [Great Men](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_man_theory)--fine. I do not undervalue the material factors of the great masses in history. The undercurrents of society were crucial in Trotsky's time--the peasantry, who traded their sickles and sycthes for bayonettes, the factory workers, the women. But consider how long 20th century is chock-full of "Great" men: Bismarck, Churchill, Hitler, Lenin, Stalin, Mao... Yes, perhaps history may have unfolded the same way without these leaders at the helm, but perhaps not. Would WW2 have played out the same if it were Chamberlain instead of Churchill? Hoover instead of Roosevelt? Trotsky instead of Stalin?

## In The Balkan Peninsula 
Trotsky, apart from being a revolutionary figure, was a great writer and critic. After being sentenced to exile (you'll start to notice a theme) in 1906 for being instrumental in the 1905 Revolution, he escaped en-route to his internment to Siberia. He gallivanted around Europe, forming and splitting and forming with multiple left wing socialist and social-democratic parties in both Russia and the more "developed" counties on the continent. He started writing for the newspaper Pravda (Правда; "Truth") under various noms-de-plume (e.g., Prince Lvov, A. Oto. Trotsky is in itself a revolutionary nom-de-guerre; his real name is Bronstein).  This Vienna-based Pravda was distinct from the later Bolshevik party organ of the same name, and was aimed at Russian Social Democratic readers in emigre circles.

Trotsky was employed by by Russo-Ukranian paper Kievskaya Mysl (Киевская мысль; "Kyivan Opinion") as a war correspondent, and found himself reporting on the Balkan Wars of 1912-13. In this correspondence, now available as a [book](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Balkan-Wars-1912-1913-Leon-Trotsky/dp/0873489071), he interviews Ministers, soldiers, Bulgars, Serbs, wives, and drunks for a completely gripping and rounded account of the atrocities occuring in the peninsula. The systematic slaughter of Turks and Albanians; the waste of blood, of capital, of time these two wars were. He also, however, displays his marxist feathers and writes scathingly of the political situation in Bulgaria and of the liberal attitudes of his Russian press contemperaries. 

In a manner distinct to the principles of Trotsky, he bemoans the state of press censorship in the military dictatorship of Bulgaria: an absurd situation where reporters are not allowed on the battlefield except pre-approved liberal "slavophile" journalists who (fail to) report the reality on the ground--the killing for the cross and crescent, the rape and murder of peasant workers and women. The mass graves and burning villages of Albanians and Turks for whom the Balkan allies deem to much of a burden to take as prisoner. One of the first industrialised theatres of destruction, and a pretext to the greatest of wars. 

In order to approve a telegram dispatch, you must pad your report with pro-Bulgar rhetoric, which the Russian reader back home will decode. The censors, instead of laying the onus on the names (or pen-names) on the by-lines of these dispatches, lays the onus on itself, completely pointlessly and unforcedly destroying the purpose of correspondence: it is not for Bulgaria to decide what Russian opinion reads and believes, it is Russian opinion. This attitude, one of liberal self-flagellation and Great Power (if we consider the Balkan Federation as an attempt at being a Great Power) meddling, and inability of action, are some of Trotsky's biggest bug-bears with the global order of his time. Why must we wait until the war is over to fact check these claims? The blood is being spilt now! 

## Rhetoric
But, here is why Trotsky is so fascinating. At a macro scale, yes, he is a skillful reporter and paints the catastrophe of war and the Balkan War in particular in great quality and details it through a Marxist lens, but what I enjoy most about Trotsky is his rhetoric. His name-calling, self-assuredness, and petty ruthlessness.

Trotsky is a historian--he, as well as Lenin, studied the great revolutions in England and France. He was himself a living historical figure! He, in exile, wrote a [history of the Russian Revolution](https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1930/hrr/), collating not only his own experience but documents and accounts from elsewhere. His historical equipment allows for some excellent rhetorical flourishes on his enemies. During the second Balkan war, he dubs his one of his liberal russian press opponents, V.V. Todorov, "Todorov XVII", alluding to his stalwart and indefensible defense of the Bulgarian Ancien Régime--living in a bubble, refusing to accept the atrocities occurring in the Balkans, being used by liberals to pretend that military nationalism not only acceptable but honourable. 

But history is not the only tool in his belt. Trotsky is a read-up Marxist and indeed theorist, which means he is equipped with fantastic Marxian imagery and metaphor to be deployed in myriad ways. In his History of the Russian Revolution, he describes the fall of the Tsardom a "Death Agony". In [The Revolution Betrayed](https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1936/revbet/), he calls Stalin a "bonapartist"--an uppercase "G" "Great man": autocratic, dictatorial, military leader, balancing interests of the [estates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Estates_of_the_realm) to retain absolute power.

## Stalin and Socialism In One Country

> "The agreements signed by Russia aren't worth the price of the sheet of paper they are written on" 
>
> *- Otto von Bismarck* 

In typically socialist-sectarian fashion, Trotsky would schism from the mainstream North American communist movement, which at the time supported Stalinism. Stalin's mantra, "Socialism in One Country", was an "alternate interpretation" (rejection) of traditional Marxist theories of revolution requiring wealthier, more forward countries to survive. Stalin, (we may say, as it is actually quite hard to determine *what* Stalin believed, as he never wrote anything down and would capitalise on *not* having opinions) instead believed that centralised planning and industrialisation would lead the Soviets into Elysian Fields of communism.

Indeed, this need for a modern culture was perhaps the most unexpected part of the 1917 Revolutions. Revolution requires class consciousness and coordination. The Russian peasantry were great in number and sparse in concentration. There was no organisation. Industrialisation in Russia was in a much more infantile stage than that of Germany or England. How could they organise? War. The peasants, in the barracks and on the front lines, as the pawn in the Tsarist frontline, not only saw the horrors of war with their own eyes, but would receive telegrams of home of the unrest in Petersburg and Moscow. In the industrial cities, crowds of women workers striked for bread. Russian gendarmes sent to quell the unrest were asked to point their bayonets at their sisters, wives, and mothers. It could not go on.

This course of events, however improbable and conditional they were, required the original Marxist mantra to be appended, or upended. He believed the current course of events were the correct ones to progress socialism. Stalin, after the power vacuum left after Lenin's death, used the Soviet bureaucracy to his advantage, rising from a chief pen-pusher in the cabinet to the premier strong-man of the USSR. 

The bureaucracy built by Stalin was Trotsky's great criticism. In The Revolution Betrayed, Trotsky sees this as another caste, a bourgeoisie element who's purpose is to rule and sustain itself. The great Soviet [Thermidor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermidorian_Reaction) which has halted social progress, which must be destroyed by the workers. Trotsky defines this state bureaucracy as a "degenerated workers state", a new estate in the Soviet hierarchy which has replaced the ruling class under capitalism. Just as the bourgeoisie existed a a parasitic estate, controlling the state to ensure its own survival, so too does the bureaucracy exist at the expense of the worker. To ensure the triumph of the Soviet system, trotsky believed a further revolution must take place in Russia, this time against the 
bureaucracy.

Trotsky's mantra was one of "Permanent Revolution", a continuous, border-less upheaval of the liberal capital system not until *some* democratic or socialistic change was made or concession was granted, but until a fully socialist global society was achieved. In contrast to Trotsky's view of the impending doom of the Soviet bureaucracy, he believed in Marx's original mantra of "Workers of the World, Unite!". Only an international socialist organisation could ever free the workers from their oppression.

In his final year he saw the outbreak of WW2. He saw the signing of the [Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Molotov%E2%80%93Ribbentrop_Pact) by the Nazis, a non-aggression agreement between Germany and USSR. A week later, the Nazis invaded Poland, and the Red Army followed suit. The Red Army crossed into eastern Poland under the secret protocols of the Pact, occupying what is now Belarus and Western Ukraine. Effectively, this led to Volhynia and Galicia being used as buffer lands. Trotsky fiercely condemned both the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact and the following occupation. A new split in his camp emerged: those who saw the USSR as a new imperialist force, and those who saw the USSR as still a "degenerated workers state". Despite the openly imperialist character of this intervention, the rank-and-file of the Red Army did carry out socialistic reforms in Poland, such as the end of landlordism and nationalisation of land.

## Byelorussia and Ukraine
Trotsky was opposed to Stalin not only on the Polish Question, but also on the Ukranian and Byelorussian Question. "Ukraine" means "The Borderlands", and "Byelorussia" (what is now called Belarus) means "White Russia". Byelorussia and Ukraine, much like Belgium and  Bulgaria, were small states bordering Great Powers. Situated between Austria-Hungary and Tsarist Russia in the Great War, then between Nazi Germany and Stalinist Russia 30 years later, Ukraine and Byelorussia have been the main stage in the theatre of the eastern front. Trotsky would die before he saw his native Ukraine be flattened once by the Nazis on their way to Stalingrad and once more by the Red Army on their way to Berlin. During his time, however, he saw the tragic (and tragically, contested) great [famines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holodomor) and [Terror](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Purge) of the 1930s. The centralised industrialisation efforts and quotas from Moscow, the killing of [property owning peasants](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kulak), of the intelligentsia, the crushing of Ukrainian nationalism under the jackboot of the Red Army, was, in Leon Trotsky's view, far from the ideals of Marxism-Leninism. 

Trotksy believed in a free, independent, and lowercase "s" soviet Ukraine. He did not believe in Ukrainian nationalism, substituting one form of imperialism for another, but a worker-led proletarian Soviet capable of defending itself against western and eastern agitation and invasion. One led by a central, yes, but non-parasitic democracy, able to self-determine against the bonapartism of her neighbours.

The differentiation between Stalin's bureaucratic capture of the Soviet system and the system itself is one of Trotsky's biggest challenges with the rest of socialist opnion. Many communists could not defend the actions of the USSR in 1939, causing them to lose their faith on the whole project. Trotsky, instead, believed in a critical [defense of the class nature of the Soviet union](https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/idom/dm/dom.pdf). He defended the ideas of [dialectical materialism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dialectical_materialism) against [eclecticism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eclecticism), which was the subject of a feud within the Trotskyist movement and caused yet another schism. 

## On Slogans

A final thought on Marxist slogans. Marx and Engels and all their successors knew how important slogans were. Indeed, they are important today: ["Stop the Boats"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stop_the_boats), ["Get Brexit Done"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Get_Brexit_Done), ["Net Stupid Zero"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Get_Brexit_Done). A slogan can get done in three words what a manifesto can only do in 50 pages. 19th and 20th century Marxists took much care into crafting their slogans. [*"The Spectre of Communism"*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/ch01.htm), [*"Workers of the world, unite! You have nothing to lose but your chains"*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Workers_of_the_world,_unite!), [*"From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs"*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/From_each_according_to_his_ability,_to_each_according_to_his_needs). 

Let us take one from V.I. Lenin: [*"Peace, Land, and Bread"*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_Decree). What is Lenin saying here? Who is this slogan aimed at? What is he materially promising here? Here, in 1917, Lenin's constituency are soldiers, peasants, and workers. Peace for the soldier, land for the peasant, and bread for the worker. This slogan means something. 

Another from Lenin:  [*"While the state exists, there can be no freedom. When there is freedom, there will be no state."*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1917/staterev/ch05.htm) From this you do not need to read Lenin to understand his aims. He sees the state as an oppressive tool, and the (violent) overthrow of the state will lead to freedom for the worker.

What does "Get Brexit Done" mean? When will we know when Brexit got done? Was it done on 23 June 2016? Is it done now? What am I materially gleaning from this slogan? What does it stir in my heart? I mean, it sounds good--anyone would be happy to get the ordeal of brexit over with and out of their mind. But it means nothing. Dominic Cummings has lobotomised the slogan. A return to *Peace, Land, and Bread*, to [*veni, vidi, vici*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Veni,_vidi,_vici), to [*Liberté, égalité, fraternité*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Libert%C3%A9,_%C3%A9galit%C3%A9,_fraternit%C3%A9). A return to revolutionary passion and zeal in politics. 